 Introduction to GitHub
Part 1: What is Version Control? (5 Minutes)

[Scene: Introduction/Welcome Slide — img1 reference]

(Speaker): Good morning/afternoon, everyone! Welcome to the Introduction to GitHub. If you've ever dealt with files named project_final.doc, project_final_v2.doc, and project_final_really_final.doc, then you already understand the problem that version control solves.

1. The Problem: Managing Changes

(Speaker): Imagine you're building a house, and you keep deleting the blueprints every time you make a change. Or worse—three different people are working on different sections of the house using three different sets of blueprints. Chaos!

2. The Solution: Git (The Technology)

(Speaker): Git is the foundation of everything we're going to talk about today. Git is a Distributed Version Control System (DVCS).

Version Control: Tracks every change—who made it and when—and allows you to go back to any previous state.

Distributed: Every developer has a full copy of the project's history.

 Key Takeaway: Git is the tool that manages history and versions on your local machine.

Part 2: What is GitHub? (5 Minutes)

[Scene: GitHub Homepage/Logo Slide — img2 reference]

1. The Platform

(Speaker): If Git is the tool, GitHub is the workshop.
GitHub is a cloud-based hosting service for Git repositories—basically social media for code.

It provides:

Storage

Management

Sharing

Collaboration tools

2. Collaboration Features

GitHub enables:

Teamwork: Multiple people can safely contribute

Review: See, comment, and approve changes

Visibility: Home to millions of open-source projects

 Key Takeaway: GitHub is the platform that hosts Git projects and enables collaboration.

Part 3: Core GitHub Concepts (10 Minutes)

[Scene: Conceptual Diagrams/Illustrations — img3 reference]

Before diving into the workflow, let's understand the four core terms.

1. Repository (Repo)

A repo is your project folder containing:

Code files

Assets

The hidden .git directory (full history)

2. Commit

A commit is a snapshot of your repository at a moment in time.
It must include a descriptive message:
✔ What changed
✔ Why it changed

3. Branch

A branch is an independent line of development.
You never experiment on the main branch; you create a new branch.

Analogy:

Main branch: Published book

Your branch: Personal notebook for drafting new chapters

4. Pull Request (PR)

A PR proposes merging changes from your branch into the main branch.
The PR allows:

Code review

Comments

Approval

Safe merging

 Workflow Summary:
Branch → Commit Changes → Pull Request → Merge

Part 4: The Essential Workflow (15 Minutes)

[Scene: Command line & GitHub workflow diagrams — img4 reference]

Let’s walk through the standard GitHub workflow:

Step 1: Clone (Get the Code)

Command:

git clone https://github.com/username/project-name.git


This downloads the project and full history.

Step 2: Branch (Isolate Your Work)

Command:

git checkout -b feature/new-design


Creating a new branch protects the main code.

Step 3: Commit (Save Your Changes Locally)

Stage files:

git add .


Commit with a message:

git commit -m "FEAT: Implemented responsive mobile layout"

Step 4: Push (Upload Your Work)

Command:

git push origin feature/new-design

Step 5: Pull Request (Collaborate & Merge)

On GitHub:

Select your branch

Create a PR

Team reviews

Maintainer merges

Part 5: Conclusion and Next Steps (5 Minutes)

Summary Slide (refer to img1–img4 collectively)

Git = the version control time machine

GitHub = the collaboration hub

Branches = safe development lanes

Pull Requests = standard peer review and merge process

👉 Pipeline:
Clone → Branch → Commit → Push → PR → Merge